* * *

I have two questions. The first one is how the discussion went inside the Governing Council regarding the very uncertain outlook for monetary policy, whether you are all in one camp or whether there is perhaps a range of opinions. The second question is on the markets, because the markets are trying to understand how fast you’re willing to act. You were quite fast in the projections already reflecting the changed situation, I would say. So is it the next meeting, perhaps, where we’re going to see action? We’re in the medium term, obviously, so longer term, but when do you think it is time to act?

Let me give you a little bit the ambiance and the process through which we went in the last couple of days. We had an in-depth discussion on the current situation, and we are ever so grateful that our staff – at the risk of having zero weekends and very, very short nights – was able to provide us with a baseline and scenarios, the overall projection efforts, as at 11 March. This is very unusual, and it’s specifically included in the monetary policy statement that this is exceptional. I don’t wish to impose that exercise on a regular basis, but this was the information which we could actually discuss in depth. We went a bit further than that, and we managed to make sure that the members of the Governing Council were extensively briefed by experts. We had a defence and military affairs professor who briefed us the day before the Governing Council meeting, and by the randomness of calendar scheduling we also had a very good presentation of climate change impacts on the ocean. And it’s not unrelated in many ways, but it’s totally random, I can assure you. So I think my goal and the goal of the Executive Board was to make sure that governors were starting from the best-informed basis to hold their in-depth discussion. And I would characterise the overall mood of the group as being calm, being determined and being laser-focused on the information that we have, the projections that we received and all data that can be analysed and factored into our decision-making process. Our decision was unanimous. You asked me about a range of views. There was no range of views. It was a unanimous decision that was taken not to move rates at all. We are going to continue doing what we have been doing, and that’s addressing the second part of your question. We are starting from a good base. I’m not saying that we are in a good place. We are well positioned, and actually you find that in the monetary policy statement. I think we are both well positioned and well equipped to deal with the development of a major shock that is unfolding, and we will continue doing that. You probably have heard me ad nauseam say “meeting by meeting”, “data-dependent” and “no preset pace”. And this was embedded in our strategy review of last July. But I’m so pleased that we finalised our agreement to operate on that basis, which is proving extremely helpful, because at the time we anticipated that we would be facing a succession of shocks, possibly in close sequence, and this is what we are seeing at the moment. That’s what we will do, which explains why I cannot give you a timeline, a date, but I can assure you that we will proceed on the basis of this analysis and on the basis of the hard work produced by staff to make sure that we have not only the baseline that you will see after this press conference, because it will be published, but also the scenarios that you will also see after the press conference, because they will also be on the website.

My first question is about your reaction function, if you could explain that a little bit. What would trigger ECB action? Are you looking at expectations? Are you looking at core inflation? Is it wage growth that needs to move? What is it that would get the ECB to actually act? The second question is: could you please preview the alternative scenarios for us? I’m curious about the adverse scenario. What does it look like? How high does inflation go? How long would it take to fall back? And how much of the energy shock would translate into core inflation?

I hope everybody else will be patient, because I might take a little longer than I normally take, but I hope it informs all of you. As I said, we will continue to apply the three key principles that I have outlined, and being data-dependent will lead us to look at everything that we normally look at, but we will be particularly attentive to a number of things, and that’s, I think, the point of your question. We will be particularly attentive to developments in all commodity markets. We will be particularly attentive to supply bottlenecks. We will be particularly attentive to selling price expectations of firms, and through the corporate telephone survey in particular and other surveys that we hold of good value, we can assess how often price revisions will take place. That will be important. We will be particularly attentive to all demand indicators, be it PMIs, consumer confidence, etc. We will be particularly attentive to wage trackers. Because what we want to really come back to is these three key points that I have mentioned and that are also in the monetary policy statement. All of that which is unfolding at the moment, which is a severe shock, will depend on the duration, the intensity and the propagation. And by propagation, I mean the indirect effects and the second-round effects. And we need to have the best sensors and the best way to anticipate where these indirect effects and where these second-round effects are going, if at all. That’s what we will be attentive to.

Now, I’m going to try to take you through a little bit the scenarios, but I very strongly encourage you to look at the material that we will be releasing after this press conference, which will be far more detailed and informative. But essentially, the work that was done by staff is the following. Number one, they did a first baseline as at 4 March, which would have been normal exercise. And that will be available as well in what we publish later today. But that was very quickly superseded by the turn of events. So they did a second baseline as at 11 March, and that is the baseline that we hold as our baseline in our projections. And you will find all the hypotheticals that are used there in terms of the price of oil, the price of gas and the duration of the shock and the propagation. And there is a bit of propagation actually, some of it being judgemental. Some indirect effects, some secondary effects as well. And then they produced two scenarios. One is the adverse scenario, and the other one is the severe scenario. Now, you will ask me “what’s the difference between the two?” In the adverse scenario, the price of oil and gas goes significantly up and higher than in the baseline, but it falls back to the 4 March baseline pretty much at the end of our projection horizon. On the other hand, in the severe one, it goes up as well, a little higher than in the adverse, but it doesn’t fall back very fast, so it stays high for a longer period of time and it settles at the 4 March baseline beyond the end of our projection horizon. That’s one of the key differences, and obviously, given the hypotheses that are taken, the impacts on inflation and on growth are different and are higher on inflation and lower on growth. But I’m not going to give you year-by-year details of those consequences. You will find that in the scenarios. But it’s a significant difference.

How are the lessons of the 2022 inflation shock informing your approach to the current crisis? You’ve said in the run-up to the meeting that you won’t allow the same kind of inflation to materialise again, so I’m wondering whether your threshold is lower than in the past and potentially also a bit closer? That would be my first question. And the second one relates to the core inflation projections. I noticed that they are above 2%, not much, but they are above 2% throughout the forecast horizon, and I’m wondering if those are already second-round effects. And more generally, I would be interested in how you feel about those projections in relation to your mandate.

I feel very proud of our staff. That I can assure you, because I don’t think that there are many other central banks that have had the courage to try to cut off at 11 March and produce the set of data that we have had available. That’s how I feel. From 2022 to now, four years later, I would characterise our current position, I would have two characteristics. One is: I think we are well positioned, and I would call it the “three times two”. 2% inflation at or around target in the medium term, 2% medium-term inflation expectations, and 2% interest rates. So target, target, broadly neutral. That leads me to say that we start from a good position and we are well positioned to demonstrate our capacity to apply our strategy and to be agile, to do what is necessary. Because the second point is that we are determined to ensure that inflation stabilises at 2% in the medium term. This is our commitment. When I say also that we are well equipped, I think that in those four years we have learned, we have improved our models, we have changed our strategy and we are now in particular more attentive to risks around the outlook. We are developing scenarios and sensitivity analyses to make sure that we are as well informed as possible in order to assess the situation. So I would say that this enables us to better understand and better make our determination. I think we also understand better the mechanism of the pass-through into indirect and second-round effects. On your second question, as I said, I’m proud of the projections that have been delivered. Granted, on core, we are 2.1% in 2028. You have to remember that we include in that ETS2 applying as of 2028, and you still have a little bit remaining of the base effect and a little bit of second round.

My first question is: how concerned is the ECB about private credit in the United States? Do you see potential contagion risks in the broader financial system, so in Europe as well? And my second question is about the European Commission, which is considering a review of EU merger rules to encourage cross-border consolidation, including in the banking system, while national authorities continue to pose obstacles to such transactions. What’s the ECB’s view on this? I’m not making names.

Thank you for being so discreet about names, but you also give me a chance to offer the floor to my Vice-President, whom I am so grateful for.

Vice-President: If you look at our recent financial stability reports, we have been dealing with private credit quite a lot, and we have paid a lot of attention to private credit and the potential risks that private credit and private equity – private markets in general – have posed for financial stability. The exposure in Europe of private credit and private markets in general is much more limited than in the United States. Nevertheless, we have seen that the market is growing and these kinds of activities are exponentially growing recently and lately. What are the main problems that we have identified here and that we have indicated in our previous reports? The first one is opacity, a lack of transparency. There are some difficulties in order to know the valuations of the assets that they have in their portfolios. And even lately you have seen that some of them have started to incorporate what they call continuity funds, continuation funds. It’s an indication that there were some problems in terms of the liquidity and the valuation of these assets. There is another issue that we have paid a lot of attention to and that is quite opaque and for which there is no transparency, and that is the leverage of these kinds of instruments. And finally, we have seen as well in the case of some private credit funds that they have started to limit redemptions and to impose what they call gates. This is an indication of all the problems that I have indicated before and that I have seen before, and it’s a clear indication that there are liquidity mismatches in these kinds of funds. The interconnection with the banks and the non-banks is something that we have analysed quite in detail. As I have said before, in the case of Europe it’s much more limited, the exposure to these kinds of instruments, but it’s something that we are following closely. And for sure, what is happening in the United States could be a sort of lead indicator. Nevertheless, I repeat again that exposure in Europe is much more limited of the European banks to these kinds of instruments. So it deserves and it merits attention. I think that we need much more transparency with respect to the operations of these kinds of instruments. And the links and the interconnections with the banks is something that for sure that SSM is looking at very carefully.

President: And we are always keen to see the work produced by the Commission. We know that the 28th regime was released yesterday. We’re going to look at it carefully. Obviously on the state aid and on the encouragement of mergers, we will be looking at that also attentively, including in the banking sector.

Just coming back to your core inflation again, you’ve said that you’ve better understood the mechanisms and how energy prices translate into second-round effects. Could you maybe expand more on that and how it has maybe structurally changed? Because before, oil price increases maybe didn’t have such a big effect on core inflation. And after 2022, maybe it’s different now.

We’re back to the difference with 2022. I think another point that we have to keep in mind is that back in 2022, when the shock hit, inflation was already at 6%. That’s a big difference with where we are at the moment, where the latest reading was 1.9% and we had inflation at target in the medium term. So that’s a major difference. I think the labour market is also quite a bit different. And I’m not saying that to avoid your question, but I think all this actually matters. The fact that we have a labour market which is solid but not as hot as it was back in 2022, where we had shortages of labour and a different bargaining position, will also play a role. A caveat though: inflation expectations have a lot to do with the memory that people and corporates have of inflation. And back in 2022 the memory was dating way back. Now the memory is rather fresh because people have seen inflation. So the reaction function that they will have in terms of investment, in terms of wage negotiations and in terms of consumption is going to be informed by a fresher memory of inflation that went high and that we managed to bring back to 2%. I think the third element which is different as well and that we will have to be attentive to is that while it was a major supply shock to begin with, in 2022 we had the pent-up demand and a demand shock element about the situation that we faced. Now there’s one thing that I want to mention because I’m going to have to run, I’m sorry to say, because I need to catch a plane to go to Brussels, because I have to be there at around 5:30. When you look at the scenario analysis that will be published later on, don’t forget to keep in mind that our scenario work does not factor in any monetary policy measures, so the numbers that you will see are without monetary policy beyond the baseline, that includes what is anticipated by markets as at the cut-off date. So that’s a big difference before you jump to conclusions. So I wanted to just mention that before I say goodbye and see you again on 30 April.